# Introduction

Welcome to the *Catala domain-specific programming language*, an introductory
book about Catala. The Catala domain-specific language lets you annotate a legal
specification with executable and deployable code in an efficient,
high-assurance fashion. Automating the enforcement of a law or regulation
through the use of a computer program is not neutral for the Rule of Law as well
as the rights of users. Please thread lightly when considering automating
anything else than tax or social benefits computation.

Contrary to a rules engine, Catala is a fully-fledged programming language with
modular abstractions inspired by functional programming. But most importantly,
it enables real collaboration between lawyers and computer scientists by
allowing the practice of *pair programming* through *literate programming* for
writing and updating the programs and their legal specifications.

## Who Catala is for

Catala is a domain-specific programming language, hence its use is targeted to a
specific class of users and organizations.

### Multi-disciplinary teams

Catala is designed to be used by teams mixing legal and computer science
expertise. Indeed, automating the enforcement of a law or a regulation requires
bridging the ambiguity gap of the legal text to a computer program that knows
what to do in every possible situation. Bridging this ambiguity gap is one
of missions of lawyers, trained in interpreting legal texts and performing
legal research to come up with a decision that can be justified withing the
framework of the Rule of Law.

If lawyers should be deciding what the program does, they are not trained in
programming concepts and abstractions, nor do they know how to write thousands
of lines of code in a clean and maintainable fashion. Hence, the role of the
computer scientist is to ensure that the program automating the enforcement of a
law or regulation is clean, concise, featuring correctly-scoped abstractions
that prevent code duplication and ease maintenance and future changes. Moreover,
the computer scientist is also responsible for deploying the program in a bigger
IT system that might break its assumptions or stress its performance.

By reusing existing software engineering techniques and tools, while exhibiting
lawyer-friendly concepts at its surface, Catala lets lawyers and computer
scientists collaborate in a truly *agile* manner, going beyond the separation
between development and quality assurance teams that communicate only via test
cases and specification documents.

### Government agencies and public service organizations

Automating the enforcement of a law or regulation through a computer program is
no small task. To make sure all are treated fairly under the Rule of Law, your
program should exhaustively take into account every situation described by the
law or regulation. While automating only the most simple situation corresponding
to a majority of users might OK when propping up a proof of concept simulator,
it cannot be the basis for a production-ready public service. Indeed, creating a
difference between an automated "simple path" and a non-automated handling of
complex situation widens the digital divide, and increases confusion for users
and case workers alike.

Catala shines when the goal is to automate exhaustively and with high assurance
a given law or regulation. The language and tooling will help you manage the
growing complexity, maintenance over legal changes, corner cases and
production-ready deployment inside a legacy IT system. If you are looking for a
tool to make a quick-and-dirty prototype for a proof of concept, or a simplified
model of a law for an economic study, then you should consider using
other tools.



### CS and Law academics

## Who this book is for

##Â How to use this book

## Source code

The source files from which this book is generated can be found on
[GitHub](https://github.com/CatalaLang/catala-book).
